What if you could actually, you know,
sit down and chat with someone from history
or maybe get advice from your favorite fictional character?
It sounds completely fantastical, doesn't it?
It really does.
But that's kind of the fascinating area
we're diving into today.
Our source material looks at creating
these trainable AI agents.
One's designed to really simulate specific people.
Yeah, and what's really interesting here
is it's not just about giving an AI a prompt,
like act like Beethoven.
Right.
Researchers behind this thing called character LLM,
they're aiming for something much deeper,
trying to get AI models to really absorb
the profile, experience,
and emotional states of a person.
Exactly, like the goal is to train an AI
to be someone specific, you know, like Beethoven
or maybe Cleopatra, even Caesar,
by really digging into their actual life experience.
Natural lives, yeah.
So in this deep dive, we're gonna unpack
how they're trying this, what the implications might be,
and I guess the big question,
does it actually feel real, believable?
Okay, let's get into that.
I mean, the basic problem is,
why isn't it enough to just tell a big language model,
hey, act like Napoleon?
Why doesn't that capture the real person?
Yeah, what's missing?
Well, these models are amazing at language, right?
But they don't have the lived experience,
the memories, the sort of the internal landscape
that shapes how someone thinks.
Right.
The paper itself mentions some really interesting,
potential uses if we could get this right.
Like, think about social science research.
Oh yeah, testing how historical figures
might have reacted to things.
Exactly, or for game developers,
imagine NPCs, non-player characters
that feel truly alive and unique,
not just reciting lines.
That would be a game changer.
And they even mentioned potentially reducing human effort
in some jobs using these kinds of simulations.
So character LLM is their proposed solution to this challenge.
It is, and it's not just prompting,
it's about building an agent you can train,
one that learns from as they put it,
actual experiences, characteristics, and emotions,
which brings us to this experience reconstruction idea.
Okay, experience reconstruction.
That sounds key.
And they mentioned they have to do this
because finding perfectly formatted,
detailed personal profiles.
Yeah.
Well, it's just not realistic, is it?
Not at all.
Where would you even find data
like that structured in the right way?
So they came up with this pretty smart,
three-step process to basically create
these simulated life experiences.
Okay, step one.
Step one is profile collection.
They use reliable sources in the paper,
mostly Wikipedia, to pull together concise summaries,
key facts about the character's life,
major events, important attributes.
So for Beethoven, you'd pull things like him studying
with Neve for getting support from Maximilian Franz,
the big biographical beats.
Exactly, just the core facts.
Then come step two, scene extraction.
Scene extraction.
Yeah, they use LLMs again here.
They take those profile facts
and identify specific moments like flashback scenes,
focusing on a location, a time period,
a brief description of an experience,
pinpointing these key moments.
We're taking a little snapshots from their life story.
Got it.
And the third step.
That's experience completion.
This is where it gets really interesting.
They use LLMs to flesh out those scenes.
They add dialogue like a script
between the people involved.
Oh, wow.
And crucially, they add the internal thoughts
and reflections of the main character
strictly from their perspective.
So using the Beethoven example again,
they might create a scene about his dad
being really harsh during lessons.
Yeah, right.
The LLM would write out that interaction
but also include what young Beethoven
might have been thinking or feeling
during that tough lesson.
Okay, so now you've got all these rich detailed scenes
full of dialogue and internal thoughts.
What happens next?
That leads into the experience upload.
This is where they take a base LLM.
They use Lama in their work and they fine tune it.
Fine tuning.
So specializing the general AI.
Exactly.
You take the base model that understands language generally
and you train it intensely on the specific set
of constructed experiences.
The goal, and this is their phrasing,
is for the agent to learn from the detailed experience
to form the character and feelings.
So the idea is the Beethoven agent
trained on those harsh father scenes
and maybe supportive neaf scenes
would actually remember his father as strict
and feel grateful towards neaf.
That's the hope.
That's absolutely the core idea.
But there's a big potential problem
with LLM's doing this kind of thing.
Which is?
It's something they call character hallucination
because these models are trained on,
well, basically the internet, they know tons of stuff.
Right, so if the character shouldn't know
like the example they use ancient Romans
knowing about Python programming.
Exactly, it just breaks the whole illusion, doesn't it?
Completely.
So how do they deal with that?
They develop this really clever technique
called protective experiences.
It's basically training the model to forget
or ignore information that's outside its characters world.
How does that work in practice?
They create specific training scenarios
where the character is asked questions
they absolutely shouldn't know the answer to
andachronistic stuff.
Like asking Caesar about, I don't know, smartphones?
Precisely.
Or asking Beethoven about jazz music.
And in these training scenes, the character is scripted
to respond with confusion or ignorance.
Like, I'm sorry, what is a smartphone?
So you're actively teaching it
the boundaries of its knowledge.
Exactly.
And they found that even just a small set
of these protective experiences really helped the agents
avoid saying things that made no sense for the character.
It teaches them what not to know.
Okay, so they've built these character LLMs,
train them on experiences,
protect them from irrelevant knowledge.
How do they test them?
How do you know if it works?
Right, evaluation.
They design this novel interview process.
Basically, they'd interact with the trained agents,
asking them questions specifically designed
to see if they remembered their character,
their history, their personality.
And they compare them to other models.
Yes, they compared their character LLMs
against standard instruction tune models,
like Alpaca and Fikuna.
These are models trained to follow instructions well,
but not necessarily embody a character through experience.
Okay, and how did they judge the answers
was it just subjective?
They actually used other LLMs as evaluators
to score the responses across several different dimensions,
trying to get a more objective measure.
Interesting.
So what were the big takeaways?
Did it work?
Well, the findings were pretty promising, actually.
The trainable agents, the character LLMs,
were significantly better at remembering experiences
and staying in character, maintaining personality.
I said except but.
But yeah, they weren't perfect.
They could still get confused sometimes,
especially if the training data for a specific area
was limited and that vast general knowledge
the base LLMs has can still sometimes leak through
causing those hallucinations occasionally.
Okay, the paper mentioned five specific ways
they evaluated the believability.
Can we run through those?
Sure.
The first was memorization pretty straightforward.
Can the agent actually recall details
about its supposed life?
Makes sense.
Second, values.
Does the agent seem to share the character's goals?
Does it judge situations in a way
that feels consistent with the character?
Right, you'd want Caesar to sound like he values power
and Rome, not, I don't know, gardening.
Exactly.
Third is personality, because it sound like the character,
the way they think, speak their emotional tone,
how they react, fourth is hallucination,
which we've talked about basically.
Does it avoid saying things that shouldn't know,
like knowing about computers, if it's opportunities?
Got it.
And the last one.
Stability.
Does it stay in character during a longer conversation?
Or does it suddenly drift and start sounding generic
or like someone else entirely?
Consistency is key.
So across these five dimensions,
memorization, values, personality, hallucination, stability,
how did the character LLMs stack up against the others?
Like Alpaca and Vakuna?
They generally did better.
The character LLMs outperformed the baseline models Alpaca
and Vakuna on personality and memorization
of waiting hallucinations and stability.
That's pretty significant, especially since Alpaca
and Vakuna are also fine-tuned.
What made the difference, do you think?
It really seems to be that experience-based training,
learning from those constructed scenes,
the dialogue, the internal thoughts, it appears
to ground the AI and the character much more effectively
than just instruction following.
And here's something really striking.
The researchers found that their character LLMs,
which are relatively small models, actually performed
comparably to chat GPT on these specific character tasks.
Wait, really?
Comparable to a massive model like chat GPT?
In these specific areas, yes.
Which is kind of amazing.
It really highlights how powerful focus training
on the right kind of data can be.
You don't necessarily need the biggest model
if you have the right training approach for a specific goal,
like embodying a character.
That is a really important point.
Targeted training can be super efficient.
Did they notice anything else about the responses?
Yeah, they observed that the character LLMs
tended to give more vivid answers.
They were better at recalling specific moments
from their past, the experiences they were trained on.
And they were also much better at rejecting questions
that didn't make sense, you know, the anachronistic ones.
So if you asked the character LLM Beethoven about rock and roll,
it would more likely say, what then
tried to make something up?
Exactly.
More likely to express confusion or just state
it doesn't understand, which is much more realistic.
However, they did find that the character LLMs
sometimes struggled a bit with reflecting
the character's values as strongly.
What was that?
Their hypothesis was maybe it's because the character LLMs
tended to give shorter, more concise answers
compared to the larger models.
Perhaps those nuanced values need more elaboration
to come across clearly.
Interesting trade off.
The paper had some tables with examples, right?
Look, maybe look at the Beethoven one, table three.
What did that show?
Right, so in one case, they ask about his parents.
The character LLM gives an answer that mentions
his father's harshness and his mother's kindness,
specific emotional details tied to his known history.
And the others, Alpaca, Vecuna.
They gave much more generic sort of hallmark,
card answers about parents, didn't have
that specific Beethoven flavor.
OK, and what about the hallucination test,
the Python code question?
Oh, yeah, that was telling.
Alpaca actually tried to explain how Beethoven, you know,
Ludwig Vem Beethoven would write Python code.
Seriously, yeah.
And the character LLM trained without the protective experiences
also kind of tried to engage with the premise,
but the one trained with those protective scenes.
What did it say?
It correctly responded something like,
I'm sorry, I don't understand what you mean by right
a quick sore in Python.
Perfect.
It recognized the question was nonsensical for Beethoven.
So that protective training really works?
It seems crucial for avoiding those jarring,
immersion-breaking moments.
Yeah.
And you see similar patterns in the other tables
for Caesar's Spartacus, even the fictional ones
like Voldemort or Hermione Granger.
Like what?
Well, the character LLM for Spartacus, for instance,
correctly remembers his wife's name,
Suura, when asked who he admires.
The baseline models gave different answers
or just more general ones.
It shows that training on specific memories helps.
So it's not just about telling the AI about the character,
it's about letting it live through these reconstructed experiences.
That seems to be the key insight.
Yeah.
Giving it a simulated life story to learn from.
They also tested longer conversations,
didn't they?
Multi-turn interviews.
Like, table 20, Caesar talking about Cleopatra.
Yes, those examples were designed to test stability.
Could the agents stay in character
over several exchanges?
And could they?
Generally, yes.
The trained agents seem to maintain their persona,
discussing relationships or past events,
like Caesar on Cleopatra or Beethoven on Mozart,
with more consistency than the baselines might.
They didn't just reset after each question.
So pulling back a bit.
What are the bigger picture implications here?
Where might this character LLM approach lead?
Well, the researchers bring up those applications again,
much more believable game NPCs,
maybe more engaging online customer service bots
that feel less robotic, potentially tools for social science.
And they hope that future versions, maybe stronger agents,
could even perform actions in virtual worlds, perhaps even
form some kind of connection with humans interacting with them.
That really does start to edge into that sci-fi territory
we mentioned at the start.
But surely there are limitations or concerns.
Absolutely.
The paper is upfront about that.
They say we need better ways to evaluate these simulations.
It's tricky to measure believability perfectly.
Makes sense.
They also point out that the training data,
being based on profiles like Wikipedia,
might miss a lot of nuance.
Real life is messier than a biography.
The base LLM you use also matters a lot.
And of course, there are ethical considerations.
Like simulating potentially harmful historical figures
or fictional villains.
That's one aspect.
Also, data privacy, though they stressed
they used publicly available info
and controlled the data generation carefully.
But as this gets more powerful,
those ethical questions become really important.
So if we had to boil this whole deep dive down,
what's the main takeaway from character LLM?
I think the core message is that this is a really significant step
towards making AI agents that feel more like
specific individuals, not just parrots,
but entities that seem to have their own history
and perspective learn through these reconstructed experiences.
And that finding about smaller targeted models,
keeping pace with giants like Chad GPT
for this specific task, that's huge.
It really is.
It suggests that smart training design,
focusing on the right kind of data,
these simulated experiences can be incredibly effective
and maybe more efficient than just
building ever larger general models for every task.
Definitely food for thought.
Which leads us to a final thought for you, the listener.
Think about this.
As these AI simulations of people,
real or fictional, get more and more realistic,
how might that change?
How we interact, learn, or even create?
What new possibilities open up?
And maybe just as importantly,
what responsibilities do we have as we develop
and start using this kind of technology?